sūryaspardhikirīṭamūrdhvatilakaprodbhāsiphālāntaraṃ
kāruṇyākulanetramārdrahasitollāsaṃ sunāsāpuṭam|
gaṇḍodyanmakarābhakuṇḍalayugaṃ kaṇṭhojvalatkaustubhaṃ
tvadrūpaṃ vanamālyahārapaṭalaśrīvatsadīpraṃ bhaje||1||
sūrya-spardhi-kirīṭam-	with a crown which rivals the Sun (in brilliance)
ūrdhvatilaka-prodbhāsi-phālāntaram	by the upright mark (tilak of sandal paste) whose forehead is made more resplendent,
kāruṇya-ākulanetram-	whose eyes are brimming with mercy
ārdra-hasita-ullāsam	(whose face) is lit up with a benevolent smile
sunāsāpuṭam	with a shapely nose
gaṇḍodyan-makara-ābha-kuṇḍala-yugam	with cheeks shining due to the brilliance of a pair of fish shaped ear pendants
kaṇṭhojjvalat-kaustubham	with the Kaustubh jewel shining on the neck
tvat-rūpam	Thy form
vanamālya-hāra-paṭala-śrīvatsadīpram	(and Thy bosom) resplendent with garlands of flowers (and tulsi) necklaces ( of pearls and gems) and the mark of Srivatsa
bhaje	I meditate upon
O Lord! I meditate upon Thy form: wearing a crown that rivals the sun in brilliance, the forehead adorned with the upright sandal paste mark (tilak), the all merciful eyes, the sweet smile, shapely nose, with cheeks reflecting the fish shaped pendants adorning Thy ears, the neck shining due to the lustre of Kaustubha gem, Thy chest bedecked with the Vanamaala, necklaces of gold and precious stones and the auspicious mark of Sreevatsa.
keyūrāṅgadakaṅkaṇottamamahāratnāṅgulīyāṅkita-
śrīmadbāhucatuṣkasaṅgatagadāśaṅkhāripaṅkeruhām |
kāñcit kāñcanakāñcilāñcchitalasatpītāmbarālambinī-
mālambe vimalāmbujadyutipadāṃ mūrtiṃ tavārticchidam ||2||
keyūrāṅgada-kaṅkaṇottama-mahāratna-āṅgulīya-aṅkita-	(ornaments such as) Keyur (epaulets) Angada (armlets) Kankana (bracelets)and finger rings, studded with gems
śrīmadbāhu-catuṣkasaṅgata-gadā-śaṅkha-ari-paṅkeruhāṃ	adorning the sacred four arms, holding the mace, the conch, the discus and the lotus
kāñcit	Indescribable (form)
kāñcana-kāñci-lāñcchita-lasat-pītāmbara-ālambinīm-	wearing a yellow resplendent silk cloth, fastened by a golden waist band
ālambe	I take refuge in (Thy form)
vimala-ambuja-dyuti-padāṃ	with pure lotuses like lustrous feet
mūrtiṃ tava-	Thy form
ārticchidaṃ	which removes the woes (of devotees)
O Lord! Thy four sacred arms are adorned with ornaments namely, Keyur (epaulets) Angada (armlets) Kankana (bracelets) and finger rings studded with gems. The arms holding in each hand the Gadaa (mace), Shankha (conch), Chakra (discus),Padma (lotus); and Thy waist adorned with the yellow silk fastened by a golden waist-band. Lord, Thy feet are like beautiful pure lotuses. I seek refuge in this, Thy enchanting form, which is the remover of all sorrows.
yatttrailokyamahīyaso'pi mahitaṃ sammohanaṃ mohanāt
kāntaṃ kāntinidhānato'pi madhuraṃ mādhuryadhuryādapi |
saundaryottarato'pi sundarataraṃ tvadrūpamāścaryato'-
pyāścaryaṃ bhuvane na kasya kutukaṃ puṣṇāti viṣṇo vibho ||3||
yat-trailokya-mahīyasa: - api mahitaṃ	that which is superior to (what is considered to be) the greatest in all the three worlds
sammohanaṃ mohanāt	more charming than the most charming
kāntaṃ kānti-nidhānata: - api	more brilliant than the most brilliant even
madhuram mādhurya-dhuryāt-api	sweeter than the sweetest even
saundarya-uttarata: - api sundarataraṃ	more beautiful than even the most beautiful
tvat-rūpam-	Thy form,
āścaryata: - api-āścaryaṃ	(which is) the wonder of wonders
bhuvane	in this world
na kasya kutukaṃ puṣṇāti	(is there any one) whose entrancement (to Thee) is not aroused
viṣṇo vibho	O All Pervading Lord Vishnu!
O all pervading Lord Vishnu! Will there be any one in this world who will not be enchanted by this splendid form of Thine; which is superior to what is considered the most glorious in all the three worlds; which is charming than the most charming entities; which is more attractive than the most attractive; whose sweetness excels the sweetest; whose beauty rivals the most beautiful and is a wonder of all wonders.
tattādṛṅmadhurātmakaṃ tava vapu: samprāpya sampanmayī
sā devī paramotsukā cirataraṃ nāste svabhakteṣvapi |
tenāsyā bata kaṣṭamacyuta vibho tvadrūpamānojñaka -
premasthairyamayādacāpalabalāccāpalyavārtodabhūt ||4||
tat-tādṛk-madhura-ātmakaṃ	(of) that such incomparable beauty
tava vapu:	Thy form
samprāpya	having got (in marriage)
sampanmayī	the embodiment of prosperity and auspiciousness
sā devī	that Devi (Laxmi)
parama-utsukā	(who) became very much attached (to Thee)
cirataraṃ na-āste	does not stay for long
sva-bhakteṣu-api	even with her own devotees
tena-asyā	because of that, her
bata kaṣṭam-	but alas
acyuta vibho	O changeless One,O Lord!
tvat-rūpa-mānojñaka-prema-sthairyamayāt-	because of the unwavering love for the enchanting beauty of Thy form
acāpala-balāt-	because of the power of (her) firm (love for Thee)
cāpalya-vārtā-	as fickle (goddess), the reputation
udabhūt	has risen
O changeless One! what a pity. Thy consort Laxmi Devi, the Goddess of prosperity and auspiciousness,having attained Thee in marriage, became so attached to Thy enchanting form, and was so much in love with Thee, that she was not inclined to be with even her own devotees. Alas, O Lord! due to her attachment to Thee, she acquired the reputation of being fickle minded towards her own devotees.
lakṣmīstāvakarāmaṇīyakahṛtaiveyaṃ pareṣvasthire-
tyasminnanyadapi pramāṇamadhunā vakṣyāmi lakṣmīpate |
ye tvaddhyānaguṇānukīrtanarasāsaktā hi bhaktā janā-
steṣveṣā vasati sthiraiva dayitaprastāvadattādarā ||5||
lakṣmī: -	Laxmi
tāvaka-rāmaṇīyakahṛtā-eva-iyaṃ	being thus captivated by Thy beauty only, she
pareṣu-asthira-iti-	is unstable with others
asmin-anyat-api pramāṇam-adhunā	in this respect, another proof also ,now,
vakṣyāmi	I will state
lakṣmīpate	O Consort of Laxmi!
ye tvat-dhyāna-guṇa-anukīrtana-rasa-āsktā	those who meditate and are always engrossed in singing Thy glory
hi bhaktā janā: -	certainly (with) such devotees
teṣu-eṣā vasati sthiraiva	with them she stays always
dayita-prastāva-datta-ādarā	(being) listening attentively to the praises of her beloved Lord
O Lord! Consort of Laxmi! In support of my statement that Laxmi being attached to Thy enchantment is fickle with others, I will now give another proof. She stays permanently with those devotees (of Thine) who always meditate and blissfully sing Thy glory. She remains there because she is keen to listen attentively to the praises of her beloved Lord.
evaṃbhūtamanojñatānavasudhāniṣyandasandohanaṃ
tvadrūpaṃ paracidrasāyanamayaṃ cetoharaṃ śṛṇvatām |
sadya: prerayate matiṃ madayate romāñcayatyaṅgakaṃ
vyāsiñcatyapi śītavāṣpavisarairānandamūrchodbhavai: ||6||
evaṃ-bhūta-manojñatā-	(Thy form) of such celestial beauty which is fascinating
nava-sudhā-	(from which) pure nectar
niṣyanda-sandohanaṃ	is constantly showering
tvat rūpaṃ	Thy form
para-cit-rasāyanamayaṃ	which is combination of supreme consciousness and bliss
cetoharaṃ	which captivates the mind
śṛṇvatām	of those who (devotedly) hear (the recitals of accounts of Thy deeds)
sadya: prerayate	(and) immediately stimulates
matiṃ madayate	(and) fills the mind with joy
romāñcayati-aṅgakaṃ	excites horripilation in all the limbs
vyāsiñcati-api	bathes also (their bodies)
śīta vāṣpa-visarai: -	with the flood of cool tears
ānanda-mūrcchā-udbhavai:	produced from ecstasy of joy
O Lord! Thy captivating form which continuously showers pure nectar, which is itself the Supreme Bliss-Consciousness holds the minds of those who hear Thy glories. Their minds are immediately stimulated and filled with joy. They experience horripilation all over their body and are bathed in the cool tears produced from ecstasy of joy.
evaṃbhūtatayā hi bhaktyabhihito yogassa yogadvayāt
karmajñānamayāt bhṛśottamataro yogīśvarairgīyate |
saundaryaikarasātmake tvayi khalu premaprakarṣātmikā
bhaktirniśramameva viśvapuruṣairlabhyā ramāvallabha ||7||
evaṃ bhūtatayā hi	it is because of these reasons only
bhakti-abhihita: yoga: -sa	that the yoga known as Bhakti (devotion), that
yogadvayāt karma-jñānamayāt	(in comparison to) the two yogas of Karma and Gyaana
bhṛśottamatara:	is indeed superior
yogīśvarai: - gīyate	so has been extolled by great sages
saundaryaika-rasa-ātmake tvayi khalu	indeed in Thee, who are pure beauty incarnate,
premaprakarṣa-ātmikā bhakti: -	devotion which emanates from intense love
niśramam-eva	effortlessly
viśvapuruṣai: -	by all human beings
labhyā	is attainable
ramāvallabh	O Consort of Laxmi!
O consort of Goddess Lakshmi! Thy enchanting form automatically captures the minds of the devotees. Hence Bhakti yoga is considered a far easier path compared to the other two paths of Karma yoga and Gyaana yoga. It has thus been extolled by the great sages. All human beings can effortlessly attain Thee through Bhakti, which is intense love to Thee.
niṣkāmaṃ niyatasvadharmacaraṇaṃ yat karmayogābhidhaṃ
taddūretyaphalaṃ yadaupaniṣadajñānopalabhyaṃ puna: |
tattvavyaktatayā sudurgamataraṃ cittasya tasmādvibho
tvatpremātmakabhaktireva satataṃ svādīyasī śreyasī ||8||
niṣkāmaṃ	without selfish desire
niyata-svadharma-caraṇaṃ	which consists in the performance of one's duties
yat karmayoga-abhidhaṃ	that which is called Karma yoga
tat-dūretya-phalaṃ	that becomes fruitful only in a distant future
yat-upaniṣad-jñāna-upalabhyaṃ puna:	(again) that which consists in attaining knowledge of Brahman as described in the Upanishads
tat-tu-avyaktatayā	that indeed being abstract
sudurgamataraṃ cittasya	is very difficult for the mind to pursue
tasmāt-vibho	hence, O All pervading Lord
tvat-premātmaka-bhakti:eva	the Bhakti yoga which consists only in love for Thee
satataṃ	(is) always
svādīyasī	the sweetest
śreyasī	(and) most beneficial
O All pervading Lord! The path of Karma yoga which consists of performing one's duties without expectation of fruits, needs to be practiced for a long time to get results.The path of Gyaana yoga which consists of knowing the Brahman, as explained in the Upanishads, is very difficult for the mind to pursue because of its abstract nature.Therefore, O Lord! Bhakti yoga which is of the nature of pure love to Thee is the sweetest and the noblest and hence most beneficial.
atyāyāsakarāṇi karmapaṭalānyācarya niryanmalā
bodhe bhaktipathe'thavā'pyucitatāmāyānti kiṃ tāvatā |
kliṣṭvā tarkapathe paraṃ tava vapurbrahmākhyamanye puna-
ścittārdratvamṛte vicintya bahubhissiddhyanti janmāntarai: ||9||
ati-āyāsa-karāṇi	demanding great effort
karmapaṭalāni-	the disciplines of Karma (yoga)
ācarya	by performing
niryanmalā	become purified (in mind)
bodhe	(required) for following the path of Gyaana (yoga)
bhaktipathe-athavā-api-	and also for the path of Bhakti (yoga)
ucitatām-āyānti	(one) gains fitness
kiṃ tāvatā	what is the use (after spending so much effort)
kliṣṭvā tarkapathe	of straining in the path of logical reasoning (Gyaana yoga)
paraṃ tava vapu: - brahma-ākhyam-	(because) Thy unmanifested aspect known as Supreme Brahman
anye puna: -	others, however
citta-ārdratvam-ṛte	without melting of the heart (in love)
vicintya	pondering over (trying to fathom)
bahubhi: -	(take) a lot of (time)
siddhyanti	attain
janmāntarai:	after many lives
O Lord! Some people follow the path of Karma Yoga,and perform the various disciplines for long and attain mental purity. This only entitles them to become fit for the practice of Gyaana or Bhakti yoga. Some others strive hard pondering over the attributeless Supreme Brahman, based on logic and reason. They, without melting their hearts in love for Thee, take a long time to reach their goal of perfection.
tvadbhaktistu kathārasāmṛtajharīnirmajjanena svayaṃ
siddhyantī vimalaprabodhapadavīmakleśatastanvatī |
sadyassiddhikarī jayatyayi vibho saivāstu me tvatpada-
premaprauḍhirasārdratā drutataraṃ vātālayādhīśvara ||10||
tvat-bhakti: - tu	devotion to Thee, indeed
kathārasa-amṛtajharī-	in the flow of nectar showering from Thy stories
nirmajjanena	by submerging in its bliss
svayaṃ siddhyantī	is self attainable, directly
vimala-prabodha-padavīm-	the state of pure knowledge and enlightenment
akleśata: -	without any effort
tanvatī	bestows (because it gives)
sadya: - siddhikarī	instant achievement
jayati-	(and) is superior (to the other two paths)
ayi vibho	O Thou Universal Lord!
sā-eva-astu me	may I have that (Bhakti)
tvat-pada-prema-prauḍhi-rasa-ārdratā	the state of melting of the heart from the bliss of intense love for Thy feet
drutataraṃ	very soon
vātālayādhīśvara	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
O all pervading Lord! Devotion to Thee is easily attainable just by submerging oneself in the nectarine flood of Thy stories. This can be done without much effort and it instantly leads to pure Knowledge - Bliss. O Lord of Guruvaayur! May I soon experience that state of melting of the heart in intense love for Thy lotus feet.